 as a v alid user of 
a web application.  
• Unnecessary Open Ports and Services: Nmap identifies open ports. Each port is a 
possible entry point for attack. If Nmap reports a service with an old version (e.g., an 
unpatched Microsoft Internet Information Services (IIS) server), it is linked with Co mmon 
Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVEs).  
• Misconfigurations: Both tools detect misconfigurations. Nmap might detect a firewall 
failing to filter out banned traffic, while Wireshark might detect a misconfigured DNS server 
leaking zone transfers, or a network with devices continually sending exces sive ARP 
requests, which slows the network.  
6. Ethics and Legality  
These tools' capabilities require strict ethical considerations and legal adherence. Nmap and 
Wireshark work in a legally grey area, as they actively scan systems and capture network 
traffic, respectively.  
Legally, intercepting packets and port scanning may be viewed as a violation of cyber crime 
laws, such as the Australian Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979 or state 
and/or federal computer misuse acts (Chaikin, 2006). Employing Nmap to s can a third -party 
network without written permission could be seen as a form of unauthorized access or 
cyberattack.  
Morally, network traffic analysis raises issues of privacy. Wireshark can capture all traffic, 
including personal emails, credit card numbers, corporate secrets and confidential data. 
Cybersecurity practitioners ethically benefit from following the princip le of least privilege - 

---PAGE BREAK---

5 
 capturing only what is necessary for the investigation at hand, and securely disposing of 
packet capture (PCAP) files when done.  
Scanning and monitoring activities must be in line with organisational Acceptable Use 
Policies (AUP) and have strict "Rules of Engagement" in the case of penetration testing. Any 
actions beyond these guidelines could result in dismissal and criminal charge s. 
7. Industry Applications  
Wireshark and Nmap are widely used in the cybersecurity industry.  
• Cyber Security Incident Response: In the case of a cyber attack, Incident Response 
(IR) analysts use PCAP files captured with Wireshark to help build a timeline of events, to 
identify what data was stolen, and who stole it.  
• Enterprise Network Monitoring: Network Operation Centers (NOC) run automated 
Wireshark engines to constantly check for unusual network traffic to maintain security and 
optimise network performance.  
• Penetration Testing: Penetration testers use Nmap as the first step in the 
"reconnaissance" phase of a security assessment to discover the attack surface of a target so 
they can exploit vulnerabilities (Engebretson, 2013).  
• IT Infrastructure Auditing: IT administrators set up periodic Nmap scans of their own 
networks to ensure that firewalls are properly configured and no unauthorised "shadow IT" 
equipment is connected to the corporate network.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE BREAK---

6 
 8. Conclusion  
Wireshark and Nmap continue to be mainstays of the cybersecurity profession. Nmap 
delivers the panoramic, active visibility needed to oversee attack surfaces, while Wireshark 
delivers the microscopic, passive visibility needed to analyse intricate network activity and 
security threats. Theoretical understanding of these tools reveals that cybersecurity is not 
only about using defensive tools, but also having clear insight into network operations. But 
the powerful capabilities of these tools highlight the ne ed for robust ethical and legal 
standards, so that they are used to protect, rather than facilitate, information systems.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE BREAK---

7 
 References  
Andress, J. (2019) Foundations of information security: a straightforward introduction . San 
Francisco, CA: No Starch Press. Available at:  https://books.google.com.au/ books ?hl=en&lr=  
&id=k Vv6DwAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PR9&dq=Andress [Accessed 27 Apr. 2026].  
Chaikin, D. (2006) 'Network investigations of cyber attacks: the limits of digital evidence', 
Crime, Law and Social Change . Available at:  
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10611 -007-9058 -4 
 
Chappell, L. (2012) Wireshark network analysis: the official Wireshark certified network 
analyst study guide .Available at: https://elhacker.info/manuales/Redes/wireshark -network -
analysis -second -edition.pdf.  
Engebretson, P . (2013) The basics of hacking and penetration testing: ethical hacking and 
penetration testing made easy . Available at: 
https://books.google.com.au/books?hl=en&lr=&id=69dEUBJKMiYC&oi=fnd&pg=PP1& dq=En
gebretson [Accessed 27 Apr. 2026].  
Lyon, G.F. (2009) Nmap network scanning: the official Nmap project guide to network 
discovery and security scanning . Sunnyvale, CA: Insecure.  
Sanders, C. (2017) Practical packet analysis: using Wireshark to solve real -world network 
problems . 3rd edn. San Francisco, CA: No Starch Press.  
 

---PAGE BREAK---


